---
title: Fusion supporting fission
published: 2009-02-04
categories: Physics
tags: fission,fusion,nuclear waste
---

Practical power generation with controlled fusion is one of those things that has always
been "just thirty years away", in contrast to uncontrolled fusion that goes boom from over
fifty years ago.  But it turns out that controlled fusion does not even have to reach its
breakeven point, where more power is generated by fusion than is consumed, to be useful as
researchers at the University of Texas at Austin have devised a way to <a
href="https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/01/090127131654.htm">use fusion to reduce
nuclear waste</a>.

<!--more-->

While atoms such as uranium or plutonium can break apart all by themselves, they're much
more likely to split apart when hit by a neutron.  Fission in nuclear bombs or nuclear
reactors takes advantage of neutrons emitted from splitting atoms, where a dense enough
blob of fissionable elements will cause a chain reaction and generate a lot of energy.  In
fact, one of the issues in nuclear reactors is to keep the neutron emissions low enough
lest a meltdown occurs.  But nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors eventually reach the point
that they are no longer useful for generating energy, as not enough neutrons are emitted
to split the still plentiful fissionable atoms.  Even worse, the fissionable atoms make
nuclear waste radioactive.

What the researchers from the University of Texas at Austin did was to devise a way to use
fusion to promote fission.  Using a room-sized <a
href="https://www.energy.gov/science/doe-explainstokamaks">tokamak</a>, neutrons are
emitted from the fusion reaction in the tokamak.  These neutrons bombard nuclear waste and
promote fission in the material.  Not only does this generate energy from the nuclear
waste, it also turns much of the fissionable atoms into non-fissionable ones, which
greatly reduces the amount of radioactive nuclear waste.  The researchers have yet to
build an actual system for reducing nuclear waste, though, so it still remains to be seen
whether there will be an unforeseen caveat that renders their method impractical.

This method of reducing nuclear waste and generating energy is an interesting reversal of
the relationship between fusion and fission in thermonuclear warheads, which use fission
to cause a fusion reaction.  On the other hand, they aren't so different after all as both
end up using neutrons from fusion to enhance fission, since most <a
href="https://www.sindark.com/2008/04/11/thermonuclear-weapon-design/">thermonuclear
weapons</a> use the fission-triggered fusion only to force more fission to occur.
