---
title: A farewell to Phoenix
published: 2008-11-11
categories: Space
tags: Mars,Mars Phoenix Lander
---

Due to decreasing sunlight and worsening weather conditions, the <a>Mars Phoenix Lander
has finally ceased communications</a>.  Given that the lander started to <a
href="/2008/10/phoenix-winding-down/">cycle into safe mode</a> only a little while ago,
where it put itself into a mode that turned most of itself off in order to conserve power
except to send regular signals, it's not too surprising that it has ceased communications.
In fact, it's incredibly impressive that the little lander has lasted far longer than its
original 90-day mission.

![The Mars Phoenix Lander; from [NASA](https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/phoenix/multimedia/12322.html)](mars-phoenix-lander.jpg)

<!--more-->

Having <a href="/2008/05/the-phoenix-has-landed/">landed on Mars</a> in May, when the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter managed to <a href="/2008/05/descent-of-the-phoenix/">see it during
its descent</a>, the Mars Phoenix Lander surprised everyone when it managed to <a
href="/2008/05/ice-surface-on-mars/">glimpse a patch of ice</a> that was probably
uncovered during its landing.  And it didn't take long for it to <a
href="/2008/06/mars-microscope/">take microscopic images of Martian dust</a>.  And despite
its <a href="/2008/06/scooped-up-mars-dirt/">first attempt at scooping up Martian soil</a>
for analysis having run into problems when the <a href="/2008/06/stuck-dirt/">dirt got
stuck on the instrument screen door</a>, it eventually managed to <a
href="/2008/06/baking-mars-dirt/">shake it in</a>.

Another surprise was unearthed when the lander <a href="/2008/06/ice-or-salt/">dug up the
Dodo-Goldilocks trench</a>, where the lander managed to expose water ice buried under the
soil.  And the water ice <a href="/2008/06/evaporating-ice-on-mars/">evaporated right
before its cameras</a>.  And it poked a fork into the Martian soil during its first
all-nighter.

Unfortunately, the lander's second attempt to scoop in soil for analysis was thwarted yet
again when it <a href="/2008/07/sticky-martian-dirt/">wouldn't even fall down from its
robotic scoop</a>.  At least the soil eventually managed its way into the instruments
before all of the water evaporated away, and in the meantime we got to see a laser light
show on Mars thanks to the lidar on the lander's weather station.  Fortunately, later
attempts to scoop in soil worked better, with <a href="/2008/10/two-ovens-to-go/">six out
of eight of the TEGA ovens</a> having been used in the end.  The Mars Phoenix Lander also
carried an atomic force microscope, so it got to take a look at Martian dust at truly
microscopic scales.

The lander also showed us sights similar to what we can see on our own planet, as it saw
frost on the ground and on itself, not to mention clouds in the sky.  Altogether, the Mars
Phoenix Lander has been fruitful in my humble opinion.  And in terms of scientific
results, the best has yet to come as us humans back on Earth have only started analyzing
the wealth of data the lander sent back.  Although I have yet to hear what went on with
the supposedly missing water that should have been in the Martian ground.

$youtube("https://www.youtube.com/embed/8m4iKZNT4eE")$
