---
title: Sound in space
published: 2008-10-26
updated: 2023-05-06
categories: Astronomy
tags: sound,vacuum
---

A lot of people may not know if there is actually sound in space or not.  But among those
in the know, it is a common belief that there is no sound in space.  While this is true to
the extent that it's unrealistic to hear all the sounds during a space battle you see in
movies or on television, it is not quite true in the most strictest of senses.  There
<em>is</em> gas in space, albeit at such low densities and pressures that it would be
essentially the same as a vacuum to life forms such as us, who are used to comparatively
high-pressure atmospheres.  And where there is gas, there can be sound.

<!--more-->

But it's no sound that we will ever be able to hear with our own ears.  Compared to the <a
href="https://www.ux1.eiu.edu/~cfjps/1400/atmos_struct.html">incredibly dense
atmosphere</a> of our own planet, with about 10<sup>19</sup> molecules per cubic
centimeter, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vacuum#Examples">space is incredibly
sparse</a>.  There are only about 10<sup>6</sup> molecules per cubic centimeter a thousand
kilometers up in the sky, while interplanetary space has only about 10 molecules per cubic
centimeter.  And interstellar space has only a tiny number of about one molecule per cubic
centimeter.  There would simply not be enough molecules hitting our ears for us to detect
any vibrations.

<!--
Gignormous microphone trying to listen to sounds from a thousand kilometers above Earth.
Derived from an image from the Wikimedia Commons and
also licensed under the GNU General Public License 3.0.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Exquisite-microphone.png
-->
![Huge microphone against the Earth](huge-microphone.png)

What kind of microphone would we actually need to detect sounds in space?  Assuming that
the required size of a microphone only depends on the number of molecules in the medium,
we could make a rough estimate of how big it would need to be.  If it's given that a 1cm
microphone suffices in our own atmosphere, we would then need a 10<sup>11</sup>m
microphone to detect sound about a thousand kilometers in the sky.  That's about the
distance from the Sun to the Earth!  And it's even worse in interplanetary and
interstellar space: interplanetary space would require a 10<sup>16</sup>m microphone,
while interstellar space would require a 10<sup>17</sup>m one.  That's like one to ten
light years!

These sizes are based on totally unrealistic assumptions such as the same techniques being
used to construct microphones at all scales and the surrounding gas all having the same
temperature or composition, but at least it gives an order of magnitude sense of how
difficult detecting sound in space would be.  Conversely, by the same reasoning we can
figure out that <em>generating</em> any sound worth a damn would require enormous
speakers.  Given how tenuous such sounds would be, it might be tempting to consider them
irrelevant and pretend that there is absolutely no sound in space.  But the fact that
there is sound in space has real consequences that we can observe in the sky.

![Trail of supersonic Mira; from [NASA](https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/galex/galex-20070815.html)](supersonic-mira.jpg)

One vivid example is the <a
href="https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/galex/galex-20070815.html">trail of the
supersonic star Mira</a> that GALEX observed.  We also see bow shocks as <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stellar_kinematics#Runaway_stars">runaway stars</a>
travel at supersonic speeds through the interstellar medium.  Considering that the speed
of sound is typically much higher in space than in our atmosphere, these stars are moving
<em>really</em> fast.  We can also observe <a
href="https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/chandra/news/new-nasa-black-hole-sonifications-with-a-remix.html">sound waves generated by black holes</a>, which can <a
href="https://www.universetoday.com/750/black-hole-stops-star-formation-in-elliptical-galaxy/">influence star formation</a>.
Other types of sounds in space generated by astronomical phenomenon could also play a role
in star formation.

So the next time you hear sounds in space when watching movies or television, not only
could you smugly point out that there's no way we could hear sounds in space, you could
also break your friends' minds by pointing out that, contrary to what you just said, there
<em>are</em> sounds in space.  And enjoy the mind-numbing as you try to explain the size
of the speakers and microphones that would be required in space.  Not to mention that
you'll finally know what astronomers are talking about when they mention stars and stuff
moving at supersonic speeds.
